0:00  
Hi, my name is Hannah Owens, and I'm here to explain to what a niche is in the context of species distribution modeling. There are many different definitions of niches in ecology, but specifically in niche modeling, or the species distribution modeling--what we're talking about when we say niche is really something that was derived first from Joseph Grinnell, his concept. So Joseph Grinnell was a researcher at the beginning of the 20th century in the United States, he was mostly working in California. And this quote comes from a study that he did on the California Thrasher, which is this bird that is shown here. He said, "An explanation of this restricted distribution is probably to be found in the close adjustment of the bird in various physiological and psychological respects to a narrow range of environmental conditions. The nature of these critical conditions is to be learned through an examination of the birds habitat." So what Grinnell was thinking about here was he was thinking about the niche as the distribution of environmental conditions that are suitable for--in this case--the California Thrasher specifically where it's found is where they're suitable conditions for that species. And based on where you see the bird, you can infer what conditions are suitable by quantifying the environmental conditions where that observation was made. So that makes sense, right? A little more abstract, is the concept that G. Evelyn Hutchinson came up with, which is this idea of the N-dimensional hypervolume. And so, Hutchinson came along later and further built on this idea of species being found in terms of the resources that they use. resources in this case means space in the environment, which he suggested thinking of as an n dimensional niche hypervolume. Each dimension in the hypervolume is a different environmental characteristic. In the case of the cube shown here, temperature, salinity and bathymetry, so each axis is a different environmental variable. The colored dots represent the niches of two marine fish species, you can see that although there's overlap, they just occupy distinct areas within that hypervolume. So these two species have distinct niche requirements. So from these two, we take away a few things. From Grinnell, we take away the idea that the ecological niche of a species is spatially explicit. It's composed of resources that are not depletable. So in this case, "resources" is mostly used in the context of environmental variables. And they can be measured from the distribution of the species. So where the species is found is where there are suitable conditions. And from Hutchinson, we get this idea that each of these environmental variables can serve as an access and an end an n-dimensional hypervolume. So generally, this is the theoretical framework we use to model an ecological niche that combines the two ideas of these ecologists. However, there is a further distinction to be made as far as the ecological niche is concerned. And that's the idea of the fundamental niche, which is tied to physiological tolerances. So ideally, we're modeling the fundamental niches of species based on where it's found. So the fundamental niche is the full range of environmental conditions where the species can persist. And what we're seeing here is a particular environmental variable. So we'll call it temperature. And then you might imagine suitability on the y axis. So somewhere in the middle of the temperature range is where the species is most comfortable, it's actually able to reproduce. If we move out a little bit from that optimal range, it can still grow, but it may not be reproducing as well. If we move out a little bit from there, it may not be able to grow, but it can still feed. If we move that a little bit from there, it may not die, but it can't really feed either. If you move out too far from the edges of the range, that is where fatalities actually occur. And so the fundamental niche is actually something that evolutionary selection can act on. However, in practice, what we're actually modeling when we model is species distribution, is the subset of the fundamental niche that the species can access and experience favorable biotic interactions. So in this little diagram, there are three main factors that limit where a species can be found. We've already talked about the abiotic niche of a species--that's shown here.

4:55  
But we also have to think about it in terms of favorable biotic interactions, which is shown by this gray circle here, and that might be things like beneficial species on which the species of interest depend. But it could also be things like negative competition or disease. And finally, the area of the last set of determining characteristics as far as where the species is found is accessibility or movement. So can the species actually access a combination of a biotic and biotic really favorable characteristics and think about this in terms of, for accessible area: there may be areas where a species can't physically access. Maybe it evolved in South Africa, and there's acceptable habitat in Argentina or the Mediterranean,  but because it originated in South Africa and has no means of dispersing to Argentina or the Mediterranean, it can't access those habitats, and so it's not found there. I'll give you a quick biological example. So this is a classic example, using barnacles. So there are two species of barnacles that compete in the intertidal zone. And so they're the first species, Balanus is in the area of the intertidal zone that stays wet all the time, it needs that moisture in order to persist. Whereas Cthalamus has a fundamental niche that ranges from high t-- from the high tide line all the way to the low tide line, it could persist wherever it wanted within that space. So those are the fundamental missions of the species. But what you're seeing here are the realized missions of those species. So Balanus, the realized niche is the same as the fundamental niche. So it's only found where it can stay wet all the time. Whereas Cthalamus is only found where it is not being out competed by Balanus, which is a much tougher species. So Cthalamus is only found in the part of the fundamental niche where Balanus does not occur. So if you're only looking at this in terms of the realized niche, you may not be characterizing the full fundamental niche of thalamus, whereas rebalance you are. And it's important to keep that in mind when we're doing these distribution models. So the niche that you're actually modeling is, ideally the fundamental niche, but it's always the realized niche. Hopefully, the realized niche is close to the fundamental niche. Hopefully we can actually approximate the limitations of the fundamental niche from the realized niche. But it's important to remember that there may be interference from biological or historical factors. But remember, again, it's always the intersection of the abiotic niche, biotic interactions, and accessibility or movement (also called the historical components). And that's it for the niche.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
